# Logging & Printing

Logging (mainly about persisting the information) and printing (mainly about displaying the information) provide a collective way to manage the messages generated from LLLM, besides the exceptions. It serves for debugging, analyzing, and understanding the behavior of the LLLM system. As an agentic system output complex and long dialogs, which are not easily observable in the terminal, controlling what to print in the terminal, way to view the full traces, and logging all crutial information for post-analysis are crucial. The idea is to build a simple and flexible system ensuring the LLLM generated information are well-managed and can be easily connected to user's custom logging, experiment management, or checkpointing systems.

There are mainly these types of information generated by the LLLM system:
- Produced messages, i.e., the dialogs, agent call, and tactic call sessions: these are the parts that need to be logged and printed to the terminal for debugging and understanding the behavior of the system.
- Internal messages, i.e., the warnings, errors, logging, and all the naked print: they are mainly managed by Python's built-in logging system with WARN and ERROR levels.


## Logging System

Since Tactic is the top-level abstraction of the LLLM, the log is also organized by tactic. The job of LLLM logging is to honestly save all the information of the TacticCallSessions plainly. The developer may use a neat design of `tags` to help them organize the logs. Accessing the log of a specific tactic is exactly the same as accessing the tactic resource, that through the URL-like interface as in the [Packages](../core/packages.md) section.

The "physical structure" of logs is organized plainly by package and tactics where the developer does not need to care about the details too much by design (however, they can always access the raw logs if needed). The key is to design the tags. Tag is a str:str dictionary, for example, the user may be performing an experiment for its upper-level system, named "experiment-run-001", and each system call may be tagged with a unique identifier, for example, "system-call-001". So the tag is {"experiment":"experiment-run-001", "system-call":"system-call-001"}. Then LLLM can use this tag to save and index the logs.


### Physical Backend

By default, LLLM will apply a local DB backend, but developer may develop their own backend by inheriting the `LogBase` class. The LogBase class assumes a key-value DB interface, example is Redis, Firebase, LMDB, etc., or just local files for simple use cases.

### Organization

The logs are organized by runtime (which is determined by the lllm.toml file), thus a runtime will be a logical top-level container for the logs. This is for the simplicity, convenience (allowing the developer to access logs just like any other resources), and automatically solving the name conflict issue. It is also a key design idea of the LLLM logging that logs are also resources and managed in a unified way.


## Printing System


The purpose of printing is to help the developer diagnose and tune the system, rather than making a professional frontend. There are mainly the internal messages and the produced messages. And there are two places to print the messages: the terminal and your own frontend, such as Streamlit. 

### Standard Logging of Internal Messages

The internal messages are totally managed by Python's built-in logging system with WARN, ERROR, INFO, DEBUG levels to reduce any learning cost. The developer can control the logging level to print the messages they want to see.


### Frontend Printing of Produced Messages

For the produced messages, LLLM won't print any of them, which should be managed in the implementation of the tactic. 




